New tutorial for Blast analysis against MAdLand (#3803)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/sequence-analysis/tutorials/ncbi-blast-against-the-madland/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: "NCBI BLAST+ against the MAdLand"

> zenodo_link: 'https://zenodo.org/record/4710649'

Reviewer: It seems that this Zenodo link doesn't correspond to your own data.

questions:

> - "How to access Galaxy server?"

Reviewer: In theory users should know how to access the server, so perhaps this question is not required.

Author: noted. I will delete it

- "How can we perform Blast analysis on Galaxy?"
- "What is MAdLand DB?"

objectives:
- "Load fasta sequence into Galaxy"
- "Perform NCBI-Blast+ analysis on Galaxy"

time_estimation: "20m"
key_points:
- Blast tool searches a database of sequences for similar sequences to a query sequence.
- MAdLand is a database of fully sequenced plant and algal genomes, with an emphasis on non-seed plants and streptophyte algae that can be use for sequence similarity search.

contributors:
- deeptivarshney

---

# Introduction

<!-- This is a comment. -->

> 

Reviewer: As I mentioned to you, it would be nice to design the tutorial with the objective of solving a specific question/biological problem. In which context do you think will be useful to use that database? Which scientific question could be addressed by using it?

> MAdLand is a collection of fully sequenced plant and algal genomes, with a focus on non-seed plants and streptophyte algae. For comparison, it includes genomes from fungi, animals, the SAR group, bacteria, and archaea. It is developed and maintained by the [Rensing lab](http://plantco.de). The species are abbreviated by a 5 letter code, which consists of the first three letters of the genus and the first two of the species name, e.g. CHABR for Chara braunii. We add the gene ID to that and additional shortcuts, like whether it is plastome encoded (pt) or transcriptome-based (tr, in cases when no genome is available yet).

Reviewer: I cannot find any references about that database in this link http://plantco.de. Is there any publication that could be referenced in order to find more information?

> <agenda-title></agenda-title>
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Access the Galaxy server

> <hands-on-title>Log in or register</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Open your favorite browser (Chrome/Chromium, Safari, or Firefox, but not Internet Explorer/Edge!)
> 2. Browse to [Galaxy](https://usegalaxy.eu) 
> 3. Choose *Login or Register* from the navigation bar at the top of the page
> 4. If you have previously registered an account with this particular instance of Galaxy (user accounts are *not* shared between public servers!), proceed by logging in with your registered *public name*, or email address, and your password.
>
>    If you need to create a new account, click on *Register here* instead.

> >

Reviewer: I don't think this is really necessary in that case, since it is covered by the trainings included in the **Introduction to Galaxy Analyses** section.

# Upload data on Galaxy

> <hands-on-title> Data Upload </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial and give it a proper name
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/histories_create_new.md %}
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/histories_rename.md %}

> 

Reviewer: In this section you need to include the required steps for fetching the data from Zenodo; I suggest you to have a look at other training, which also include that info.

# Perform NCBI Blast+ on Galaxy 

> > After successfully logging in to the Galaxy server, Go to the [NCBI-Blast+](https://usegalaxy.eu/root?tool_id=toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/ncbi_blast_plus/ncbi_blastp_wrapper/2.10.1+galaxy2) tool.  

Reviewer: Here you mention both BLASTp and BLASTx; I think it would be nice to explain what are de main differences between them.  And why did you use Blastp finally.

Author: I chose BLASTp  just for an example, However I have mentioned that BLASTp and BLASTx could be perform because our database (MAdLand) contain only protein sequences. 
Do you think putting a difference make a sense in that case ?

Reviewer: Not, I think it is fine.

> Since MAdLandDB is the collection of protein sequences, You can perform [BLASTp](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/ncbi_blast_plus/ncbi_blastp_wrapper/2.10.1+galaxy2) and [BLASTx](https://usegalaxy.eu/root?tool_id=toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/ncbi_blast_plus/ncbi_blastx_wrapper/2.10.1+galaxy2) tools.

> >
> > <hands-on-title> Similarity search against MAdLand Database </hands-on-title>
> >
> > 1. {% icon tool %} As input file, select the protein sequences 
> > 2. Choose the protein BLAST database *MAdLandDB* with the following parameters:
> >    - In *"input Options"*:
> >        - {% icon param-file %} *"Protein query sequence(s)"*: `output` (Input dataset)
> >        - *"Subject database/sequences"*: `Locally installed BLAST database`
> >        - *"Protein BLAST database"*: `MAdLandDB`
> >    - In *"Output Options"*:
> >       - *"Output format"*: `Tabular (extended 25 columns)` (optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> <hands-on-title> Similarity search against MAdLand Database </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [NCBI BLAST+ blastp](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/ncbi_blast_plus/ncbi_blastp_wrapper/2.10.1+galaxy2) %} with the following parameters:
>    -  *"Protein query sequence(s)"*:  `Aminoacid input sequence`
>    - *"Subject database/sequences"*:  `Locally installed BLAST database`
>    - *"Protein BLAST database"*: `MadLandDB (Genome zoo) plant and algal genomes with a focus on non-seed plants and streptophyte algae (22 Dec 2022)`
>    - *"Type of BLAST"*:  `blastp - Traditional BLASTP to compare a protein query to a protein database`
>    - *"Set expectation value cutoff"*: `0.001`
>    - *"Output format"*: 
>    - In *"Output Options"*: `Tabular (extended 25 columns)` 
```

Reviewer: Since the pipeline described in this tutorial is not very large, I would suggest you go deeper in the advanced options and explain them a little bit; for example, depending on the input sequences, it is recommended to use a specific score matrix. Also, wouldn't be possible to use DIAMOND instead BLASTp? As DIAMOND is supposed to be much faster.

> <img src="../../images/ncbi-blast-against-the-madland/blast-example.png" alt="blast against madland" width="80%">

# Blast output 

> >{% icon tool %} The following 12 columns are predicted in the tabular formatted output file of the Blast result (you can select desired output format options):  

Reviewer: Once you have found a scientific question that can be used as starting point, I think we could try to explain the results in detail, in order to solve the initial problem.

    <th>NCBI name</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>qseqid</td>
    <td>Query Seq-id (ID of your sequence)</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>sseqid</td>
    <td>Subject Seq-id (ID of the database hit)</td>
  </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>pident</td>
    <td>Percentage of identical matches</td>
  </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>4</td>
    <td>length</td>
    <td>Alignment length</td>
  </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>mismatch</td>
    <td>Number of mismatches</td>
  </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>6</td>
    <td>gapopen</td>
    <td>Number of gap openings</td>
  </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>7</td>
    <td>qstart</td>
    <td>Start of alignment in query</td>
  </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>8</td>
    <td>qend</td>
    <td>End of alignment in query</td>
  </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>9</td>
    <td>sstart</td>
    <td>Start of alignment in subject (database hit)</td>
  </tr>
   <tr>
    <td>10</td>
    <td>send</td>
    <td>End of alignment in subject (database hit)</td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>11</td>
    <td>evalue</td>
    <td>Expectation value (E-value)</td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>12</td>
    <td>bitscore</td>
    <td>Bit score</td>
  </tr>
</table>

> For more details for BLAST analysis and output, we recommand you to follow the [Similarity-searches-blast](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/genome-annotation/tutorials/genome-annotation/tutorial.html#similarity-searches-blast) tutorial.

Reviewer: This training is still under development, so perhaps you could avoid to reference it at the moment.
